# Test set Wisps

This directory contains test cases for ixml processors based on an
eclectic collection of grammars from various sources.  Most of the
grammars are relatively brief, which is perhaps why the name *wisps*
seemed appropriate when a name needed to be found.

Sources and inspirations include:

  * Steven Pemberton (talks and papers about ixml)
  
  * Dick Grune and Ceriel J. H. Jacobs, *Parsing techniques: A
    practical guide* (New York: Ellis Horwood, 1990; Second edition
    New York: Springer, 2008), pp. 32 (1e) and 23 (2e).  Not every
    grammar in the book is transcribed here, but a lot are, with
    special but not exclusive attention to grammars which pose
    problems for parsers which are not prepared for this or that
    complication.

  * Loup Vaillant, web pages about Earley parsing

  * Joop Leo, "A general context-free parsing algorithm running in
    linear time on every LR(k) grammar without using lookahead,"
    *Theoretical Computer Science* 82 (1991): 165-176.

  * Susan Stepney, *High integrity compilation: a case study*. Hemel
    Hempstead: Prentice Hall International, 1993. Web edition.

  * Niklaus Wirth, Grundlagen und Techniken des Compilerbaus (Bonn:
    Addison-Wesley, 1996.

  * Claus Braband, Robert Giegerich, and Anders Møller, "Analyzing
    Ambiguity of Context-Free Grammars."  *Science of Computer
    Programming* 75.3 (2010): 176-191.
    https://www.itu.dk/people/brabrand/ambiguity-journal.pdf
    http://cs.au.dk/~amoeller/papers/ambiguity/journal.pdf


Ambiguous grammars, especially grammars for which some sentences have
an infinite number of parse trees, may be better represented here than
elsewhere.

As of 21 February 2022, one collection of tests is ready and available
for use: that is wisps-001-020-catalog.xml.

The other catalogs with similar names covering grammars 21-102 are not
now ready for use, nor is wisp-catalog.xml, which just points to the
others.

In the current version of this test suite, the test cases are
generated by hand with no attempt at full coverage of the grammars
beyond having at least one positive and at least one negative test
case.

